---
name: "Anthes-Unix40年昨天今天和明天"
title: "Unix turns 40: ‘The past, present and future of a revolutionary OS’"
author: "Gary Anthes"
titles:
  zh: "Unix 40年：昨天，今天和明天"
authors: 
  zh: ""
date: "2009/06/04"
created: "2019-01-31 05:29:50"
updated: ""
draft: false
read: "1"
sources: "https://www.computerworld.com/article/2524456/unix-turns-40--the-past--present-and-future-of-a-revolutionary-os.html"
translates: "陈皓 https://coolshell.cn/articles/1023.html"
tags: "文章/科技"
---

[[toc]]

# Gary Anthes

## Unix turns 40: The past, present and future of a revolutionary OS
《Unix 40年：昨天，今天和明天》

### 说明
作者：Gary Anthes

文章来源：
* 原文：[computerworld.com, unix-turns-40](https://www.computerworld.com/article/2524456/unix-turns-40--the-past--present-and-future-of-a-revolutionary-os.html)
* 翻译： [酷壳 - 陈皓, Unix 40年：昨天，今天和明天](https://coolshell.cn/articles/1023.html)

### 正文

<!-- tabs:start -->

#### **English**


##### Unix turns 40: The past, present and future of a revolutionary OS

> After four decades, the future of the operating system is clouded, 
> but its legacy will endure.

By Gary Anthes

Computerworld |Jun 4,2009 12:01 am PST

Forty years ago this summer,a programmer sat down and knocked out in one month
what would become one of the most important pieces of software ever created.

In August 1969,Ken Thompson,a programmer at AT&T subsidiary Bell Laboratories,
saw the month-long departure of his wife and young son as an opportunity to
put his ideas for a new operating system into practice.He wrote the first
version of Unix in assembly language for a wimpy Digital Equipment Corp.(DEC)
PDP-7 minicomputer,spending one week each on the operating system,a shell,an
editor and an assembler.

Thompson and a colleague,Dennis Ritchie,had been feeling adrift since Bell
Labs had withdrawn earlier in the year from a troubled project to develop a
time-sharing system called Multics (Multiplexed Information and Computing
Service).They had no desire to stick with any of the batch operating systems
that predominated at the time,nor did they want to reinvent Multics,which they
saw as grotesque and unwieldy.

After batting around some ideas for a new system,Thompson wrote the first
version of Unix,which the pair would continue to develop over the next several
years with the help of colleagues Doug McIlroy,Joe Ossanna and Rudd Canaday.
Some of the principles of Multics were carried over into their new operating
system,but the beauty of Unix then (if not now)lay in its less-is-more
philosophy.

"A powerful operating system for interactive use need not be expensive either
in equipment or in human effort,"Ritchie and Thompson would write five years
later in the Communications of the ACM (CACM),the journal of the Association
for Computing Machinery."[We hope that]users of Unix will find that the most
important characteristics of the system are its simplicity,elegance,and ease
of use."

Apparently they did.Unix would go on to become a cornerstone of IT,widely
deployed to run servers and workstations in universities,government facilities
and corporations.And its influence spread even farther than its actual
deployments,as the ACM noted in 1983 when it gave Thompson and Ritchie its top
prize,the A.M.Turing Award for contributions to IT:"The model of the Unix
system has led a generation of software designers to new ways of thinking
about programming."

###### Early steps

![Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie](../images/unix_kendennis.png)

> Thompson and Ritchie in the early days of Unix.

Of course,Unix'success didn't happen all at once.In 1971 it was ported to the
PDP-11 minicomputer,a more powerful platform than the PDP-7 for which it was
originally written.Text-formatting and text-editing programs were added,and it
was rolled out to a few typists in the Bell Labs Patent department,its first
users outside the development team.

In 1972,Ritchie wrote the high-level C programming language (based on
Thompson's earlier B language);subsequently,Thompson rewrote Unix in C,which
greatly increased the OS'portability across computing environments.Along the
way it picked up the name Unics (Uniplexed Information and Computing Service),
a play on Multics;the spelling soon morphed into Unix.

It was time to spread the word.Ritchie and Thompson's July 1974 CACM article,
"The UNIX Time-Sharing System,"took the IT world by storm.Until then,Unix had
been confined to a handful of users at Bell Labs.But now with the Association
for Computing Machinery behind it --an editor called it "elegant"--Unix was at
a tipping point.

"The CACM article had a dramatic impact,"IT historian Peter Salus wrote in his
book The Daemon,the Gnu and the Penguin."Soon,Ken was awash in requests for
Unix."

###### Hackers' heaven

Thompson and Ritchie were the consummate "hackers,"when that word referred to
someone who combined uncommon creativity,brute force intelligence and midnight
oil to solve software problems that others barely knew existed.

Their approach,and the code they wrote,greatly appealed to programmers at
universities,and later at startup companies without the mega-budgets of an
IBM,Hewlett-Packard or Microsoft.Unix was all that other hackers,such as Bill
Joy at the University of California,Rick Rashid at Carnegie Mellon University
and David Korn later at Bell Labs,could wish for.

"Nearly from the start,the system was able to,and did,maintain itself,"wrote
Thompson and Ritchie in the CACM article."Since all source programs were
always available and easily modified online,we were willing to revise and
rewrite the system and its software when new ideas were invented,discovered,or
suggested by others."

Korn,an AT&T Fellow today,worked as a programmer at Bell Labs in the 1970s.
"One of the hallmarks of Unix was that tools could be written,and better tools
could replace them,"he recalls."It wasn't some monolith where you had to buy
into everything;you could actually develop better versions."He developed the
influential Korn shell,essentially a programming language to direct Unix
operations,now available as open-source software.

Author and technology historian Salus recalls his work with the programming
language APL on an IBM System/360 mainframe as a professor at the University
of Toronto in the 1970s.It was not going well.But the day after Christmas in
1978,a friend at Columbia University gave him a demonstration of Unix running
on a minicomputer."I said,'Oh my God,'and I was an absolute convert,"says
Salus.

He says the key advantage of Unix for him was its "pipe"feature,introduced in
1973,which made it easy to pass the output of one program to another.The
pipeline concept,invented by Bell Labs'McIlroy,was subsequently copied by many
operating systems,including all the Unix variants,Linux,DOS and Windows.

![Bell Labs,Murray Hill,NJ](../images/unix_murrayhill_230.png)

> Unix was developed at Bell Labs' headquarters in Murray Hill, NJ. Credit: Alcatel-Lucent/Bell Labs

Another advantage of Unix --the second "wow,"as Salus puts it --was that it
didn't require a million-dollar mainframe to run on.It was written for the
tiny and primitive DEC PDP-7 minicomputer because that's all Thompson and
Ritchie could get their hands on in 1969."The PDP-7 was almost incapable of
anything,"Salus recalls."I was hooked."

A lot of others got hooked as well.University researchers adopted Unix in
droves because it was relatively simple and easily modified,it was undemanding
in its resource requirements,and the source code was essentially free.Startups
like Sun Microsystems and a host of now-defunct companies that specialized in
scientific computing,such as Multiflow Computer,made it their operating system
of choice for the same reasons.

###### Unix offspring

Unix grew up as a non-proprietary system because in 1956 AT&T had been
enjoined by a federal consent decree from straying from its mission to provide
telephone service.It was okay to develop software,and even to license it for a
"reasonable"fee,but the company was barred from getting into the computer
business.

Unix,which was developed with no encouragement from management,was first
viewed at AT&T as something between a curiosity and a legal headache.

Then,in the late 1970s,AT&T realized it had something of commercial importance
on its hands.Its lawyers began adopting a more favorable interpretation of the
1956 consent decree as they looked for ways to protect Unix as a trade secret.
Beginning in 1979,with the release of Version 7,Unix licenses prohibited
universities from using the Unix source code for study in their courses.

No problem,said computer science professor Andrew Tanenbaum,who had been using
Unix V6 at Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam.In 1987 he wrote a Unix clone for
use in his classrooms,creating the open-source Minix operating system to run
on the Intel 80286 microprocessor.

"Minix incorporated all the ideas of Unix,and it was a brilliant job,"Salus
says."Only a major programmer,someone who deeply understood the internals of
an operating system,could do that."Minix would become the starting point for
Linus Torvalds'1991 creation of Linux --if not exactly a Unix clone,certainly
a Unix look-alike.

Stepping back a decade or so,Bill Joy,who was a graduate student and
programmer at the University of California at Berkeley in the '70s,got his
hands on a copy of Unix from Bell Labs,and he saw it as a good platform for
his own work on a Pascal compiler and text editor.

Modifications and extensions that he and others at Berkeley made resulted in
the second major branch of Unix,called Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD)
Unix.In March 1978,Joy sent out copies of 1BSD,priced at $50.

So by 1980 there were two major lines of Unix,one from Berkeley and one from
AT&T,and the stage was set for what would become known as the Unix Wars.The
good news was that software developers anywhere could get the Unix source code
and tailor it to their needs and whims.The bad news was they did just that.
Unix proliferated,and the variants diverged.

In 1982 Joy co-founded Sun Microsystems and offered a workstation,the Sun-1,
running a version of BSD called SunOS.(Solaris would come about a decade
later.)The following year,AT&T released the first version of Unix System V,an
enormously influential operating system that would become the basis for IBM's
AIX and Hewlett-Packard's HP-UX.
Unix versions chart

![Unix versions chart](../images/unix_chart_420.png)
> The Unix family tree. Credit: Eraserhead1 (cc-by-sa-3.0, GFDL)

###### The Unix Wars

In the mid-'80s,users,including the federal government,complained that while
Unix was in theory a single,portable operating system,in fact it was anything
but.Vendors paid lip service to the complaint but worked night and day to lock
in customers with custom Unix features and APIs.

In 1987,Unix System Laboratories,a part of Bell Labs at the time,began working
with Sun on a system that would unify the two major Unix branches.The product
of their collaboration,called Unix System V Release 4.0,was released two years
later and combined features from System V Release 3,BSD,SunOS and Microsoft's
Xenix.

Other Unix vendors feared the AT&T/Sun alliance.The various parties formed
competing "standards"bodies with names like X/Open,Open Software Foundation,
Unix International and Corporation for Open Systems.The arguments,
counter-arguments and accomplishments of these groups would fill a book,but
they all claimed the high road to a unified Unix while taking potshots at each
other.

In an unpublished paper written in 1988 for the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA),the noted minicomputer pioneer Gordon Bell said this
of the just-formed Open Software Foundation,which included IBM,HP,DEC and
others allied against the AT&T/Sun partnership:"OSF is a way for the Unix
have-nots to get into the evolving market,while maintaining their high-margin
code museums.'"

The Unix Wars failed to settle differences or set a true standard for the
operating system.But in 1993,the Unix community received a wakeup call from
Microsoft in the form of Windows NT,an enterprise-class,32-bit multiprocessing
operating system.The proprietary NT was aimed squarely at Unix and was
intended to extend Microsoft's desktop hegemony to the data center and other
places owned by the likes of Sun servers.

Microsoft users applauded.Unix vendors panicked.All the major Unix rivals
united in an initiative called the Common Open Software Environment,and the
following year more or less laid down their arms by merging the
AT&T/Sun-backed Unix International group with the Open Software Foundation.
That coalition evolved into today's The Open Group,certifier of Unix systems
and owner of the Single Unix Specification,now the official definition of
"Unix."

As a practical matter,these developments may have "standardized"Unix about as
much as possible,given the competitive habits of vendors.But they may have
come too late to stem a flood tide called Linux,the open-source operating
system that grew out of Prof.Tanenbaum's Minix.

**Just what is "Unix,"anyway?**

```
Unix,most people would say,is an operating system written decades ago at
AT&T's Bell Labs,and its descendents.The major versions of Unix today branched
off a tree with two trunks:one emanating directly from AT&T and one from AT&T
via the University of California at Berkeley.The stoutest branches today are
AIX from IBM,HP-UX from HP and Solaris from Sun.

However,The Open Group,which owns the Unix trademark,defines Unix as any
operating system that has been certified by it to conform to the Single Unix
Specification (SUS).This includes OSes that are usually not thought of as
Unix,such as Mac OS X Leopard (which descended from BSD Unix and Mach)and
IBM's z/OS (which descended from the mainframe operating system MVS),because
they conform to the SUS and support SUS APIs.The basic idea is that it is Unix
if it acts like Unix,regardless of the underlying code.

A still broader definition of Unix would include Unix-like operating systems
--sometimes called Unix "clones"or "look-alikes"--that copied many ideas from
Unix but didn't directly incorporate code from Unix.The leading one of these
is Linux.

Finally,although it's reasonable to call Unix an "operating system,"as a
practical matter it is more.In addition to an OS kernel,Unix implementations
typically include utilities such as command line editors,application program
interfaces,development environments,libraries and documentation.--Gary Anthes
```

###### The future of Unix

The continued lack of complete portability across competing versions of Unix,
as well as the cost advantage of Linux and Windows on x86 commodity
processors,will prompt IT organizations to migrate away from Unix,suggests a
recent poll by Gartner Group.

"The results reaffirm continued enthusiasm for Linux as a host server
platform,with Windows similarly growing and Unix set for a long,but gradual,
decline,"says the poll report,published in February 2009.

"Unix has had a long and lively past,and while it's not going away,it will
increasingly be under pressure,"says Gartner analyst George Weiss."Linux is
the strategic 'Unix'of choice."Although Linux doesn't have the long legacy of
development,tuning and stress-testing that Unix has seen,it is approaching and
will soon equal Unix in performance,reliability and scalability,he says.

But a recent survey by Computerworld suggests that any migration away from
Unix won't happen quickly.In the survey of 130 Unix users among 211 IT
managers,90%said their companies were "very or extremely reliant"on Unix.
Slightly more than half said,"Unix is an essential platform for us and will
remain so indefinitely,"and just 12%said,"We expect to migrate away from Unix
in the future."Cost savings,primarily via server consolidation,was cited as
the number one reason for migrating away.

Weiss says the migration to commodity x86 processors will accelerate because
of the hardware cost advantages."Horizontal,scalable architectures;clustering;
cloud computing;virtualization on x86 --when you combine all those trends,the
operating system of choice is around Linux and Windows,"he says.

"For example,"Weiss says,"in the recent Cisco announcement for its Unified
Computing architecture,you have this networking,storage,compute and memory
linkage in a fabric,and you don't need Unix.You can run Linux or Windows on
x86.So,Intel is winning the war on behalf of Linux over Unix."

The Open Group,owner of the Single Unix Specification and certifier of Unix
systems,concedes little to Linux and calls Unix the system of choice for "the
high end of features,scalability and performance for mission-critical
applications."Linux,it says,tends to be the standard for smaller,less critical
applications.

AT&T's Korn is among those still bullish on Unix.Korn says a strength of Unix
over the years,starting in 1973 with the addition of pipes,is that it can
easily be broken into pieces and distributed.That will carry Unix forward,he
says:"The [pipelining]philosophy works well in cloud computing,where you build
small reusable pieces instead of one big monolithic application."

###### The Unix legacy

Regardless of the ultimate fate of Unix,the operating system born at Bell Labs
40 years ago has established a legacy likely to endure for decades more.It can
claim parentage of a long list of popular software,including the Unix
offerings of IBM,HP and Sun,Apple's Mac OS X and Linux.It has also influenced
systems with few direct roots in Unix,such as Microsoft's Windows NT and the
IBM and Microsoft versions of DOS.

Unix enabled a number of startup companies to succeed by giving them a
low-cost platform to build on.It was a core building block for the Internet
and is at the heart of telecommunications systems today.It spawned a number of
important architectural ideas such as pipelining,and the Unix derivative Mach
contributed enormously to scientific,distributed and multiprocessor computing.

The ACM may have said it best in its 1983 Turing award citation in honor of
Thompson and Ritchie's Unix work:"The genius of the Unix system is its
framework,which enables programmers to stand on the work of others."

###### Appendix: Timeline: 40 years of Unix

Year-by-year details of Unix'history

Ever wonder about how Unix got started,not to mention all the twists and turns
it took along the way?Here are some milestones of the operating system's
four-decade-long history.

- **1956**
  - A U.S. Department of Justice consent decree enjoins AT&T from "engaging ... in any business other than the furnishing of common carrier communication services."

- **1969**
  - **Mar.** -- AT&T-owned Bell Laboratories withdraws from development of Multics (Multiplexed Information and Computing Service), a pioneering but overly complicated time-sharing system. Some important principles in Multics will be carried over into Unix.
  - **Aug.** -- Ken Thompson at Bell Labs writes the first version of an as-yet-unnamed operating system, in assembly language for a DEC PDP-7 minicomputer.

- **1970**
  - Thompson's operating system is named Unics, for Uniplexed Information and Computing Service and a pun on "emasculated Multics." (The name is later mysteriously changed to Unix.)

- **1971**
  - **Feb.** -- Unix moves to the new Digital Equipment Corp. PDP-11 minicomputer.
  - **Nov.** -- The first edition of the "Unix Programmer's Manual," written by Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie, is published.

- **1972**
  - Dennis Ritchie develops the C programming language.

- **1973**
  - Unix matures. The "pipe," a mechanism for sharing information between two programs, which will influence operating systems for decades, is added to Unix. Unix is rewritten from assembler into C.

- **1974**
  - **Jan.** -- The University of California at Berkeley receives a copy of Unix.
  - **July** -- "The UNIX Timesharing System," by Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson, appears in the monthly journal of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The authors call it "a general-purpose, multi-user, interactive operating system." The article produces the first big demand for Unix.

- **1976**
  - Bell Labs programmer Mike Lesk develops UUCP (Unix-to-Unix Copy Program) for network transfer of files, e-mail and Usenet content.

- **1977**
  - Unix is ported to non-DEC hardware: Interdata 8/32 and IBM 360.

- **1978**
  - Bill Joy, a graduate student at Berkeley, sends out copies of the first Berkeley Software Distribution (1BSD), essentially Bell Labs' Unix V6 with some add-ons. BSD becomes a rival Unix branch to AT&T's Unix; its variants and eventual descendents include FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, DEC Ultrix, SunOS, NeXTstep/OpenStep and Mac OS X.

- **1980**
  - 4BSD, with DARPA sponsorship, becomes the first version of Unix to incorporate TCP/IP.

- **1982**
  - Bill Joy co-founds Sun Microsystems to produce the Unix-based Sun workstation.

- **1983**
  - AT&T releases the first version of the influential Unix System V, which will become the basis for IBM's AIX and Hewlett Packard's HP-UX.
  - Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie receive the ACM's Turing Award "for their development of generic operating systems theory and specifically for the implementation of the UNIX operating system."
  - Richard Stallman announces plans for the GNU (GNU's not Unix) operating system, a Unix look-alike composed of free software.

- **1984**
  - At the Winter USENIX/UniForum meeting, AT&T describes its support policy for Unix: "No advertising, no support, no bug fixes, payment in advance."

- X/Open Co., a European consortium of computer makers, is formed to standardize Unix in the X/Open Portability Guide.
- **1985**
  - AT&T publishes the System V Interface Definition (SVID), an attempt to set a standard for how Unix works.

- **1986**
  - Rick Rashid and colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University create the first version of Mach, a replacement kernel for BSD Unix intended to create an operating system with good portability, strong security and use in multiprocessor applications.

- **1987**
  - AT&T Bell Labs and Sun Microsystems announce plans to co-develop a system that would unify the two major Unix branches.
  - Andrew Tanenbaum writes Minix, an open-source Unix clone for use in computer science classrooms.

- **1988**
  - The "Unix Wars" are underway. In response to the AT&T/Sun partnership, rival Unix vendors including DEC, HP and IBM form the Open Software Foundation (OSF) to develop open Unix standards. AT&T and its partners then form their own standards group, Unix International.
  - The IEEE publishes Posix (Portable Operating System Interface for Unix), a set of standards for Unix interfaces.

- **1989**
  - Unix System Labs, an AT&T Bell Labs subsidiary, releases System V Release 4 (SVR4), its collaboration with Sun that unifies System V, BSD, SunOS and Xenix.

- **1990**
  - The OSF releases its SVR4 competitor, OSF/1, which is based on Mach and BSD.

- **1991**
  - Sun Microsystems announces Solaris, an operating system based on SVR4.
  - Linux Torvalds writes Linux, an open-source OS kernel inspired by Minix.

- **1992**
  - The Linux kernel is combined with GNU to create the free GNU/Linux operating system, which many refer to as simply "Linux."

- **1993**
  - AT&T sells its subsidiary Unix System Laboratories and all Unix rights to Novell. Later that year Novell transfers the Unix trademark to the X/Open group.
  - Microsoft introduces Windows NT, a powerful 32-bit multiprocessor operating system. Fear of NT will spur true Unix standardization efforts.

- **1994**
  - NASA invents Beowulf computing based on inexpensive clusters of commodity PCs running Unix or Linux on a TCP/IP LAN.

- **1996**
  - X/Open merges with Open Software Foundation to form The Open Group.

- **1999**
  - U.S. President Clinton presents the National Medal of Technology to Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie for their work at Bell Labs.

- **2001**
  - Apple releases Mac OS X, a desktop operating system based on the Mach kernel and BSD.

- **2002**
  - The Open Group announces Version 3 of the Single UNIX Specification (formerly Spec 1170).
  - Sources: Peter H. Salus, A Quarter Century of Unix; Microsoft; AT&T; The Open Group, Wikipedia and other sources.

---

#### **中文翻译**

##### Unix 40 年：昨天，今天和明天

翻译陈皓,2009年06月11日

> 经历了四个十年，操作系统的未来充满了变数，但传奇将会是永久的。

40年前的一个夏天，一个程序员只用了一个月的时间就创造出了这个世界上迄今为止最重要一个软件的原
型。

在1969年8月，Ken Thompson，AT&T公司Bell实验室的一个程序员，因为妻儿不在身边，所以有机会把
他的一些关于新的操作系统的想法付诸实现。他用汇编语言在DEC（Digital Equipment Corp.）的
PDP-7微机上写了第一个版本Unix，他只用了一周的时间就完成了一个简单的操作系统，包括一个
shell，一个编译器还有一个汇编编译器。

Thompson和他的一个同事Dennis Ritchie当时在开发一个叫“Multics（Multiplexed
Information and Computing Service复杂指令和计算服务）”的分时(Time-Sharing)操作系统，
因为这个项目当时遇上了很多麻烦，所以Thompson和Dennis当时感到很没劲，他们即不想去做当时主
流的“批处理（Batch）操作系统”，也不想去做那个看上去怪异和笨拙的Multics。

所以，在他们来来回回讨论经了一些关于新系统的想法后，Thompson写下了第一个版本的Unix，然后，
这两位老搭档在以后的几年里继续开发着这个操作系统，当然，后面有更多的同事（Doug McIlroy,
Joe Ossanna和Rudd Canaday）加入了进来。一些当时Multics的理念也被带入到这个新的操作系统
中来，不过，更为漂亮的Unix则带来了–“更少则为更多（less-is-more）”的哲学。[^1]

“一个强大的用于交互式的操作系统不应该在价格成本和人力成本上都是昂贵的”Ritchie和Thompson
在开发这个操作系统5年后，他们在”计算机协会（ACM-Association for Computing Machinery）
杂志”上发表了一篇文章《_Communications of the ACM_(CACM)》，文中说，“我们希望Unix的
用户会找到那些非常重要的系统特性就是它是‘简单的’，‘一流的’和‘易用的'”。

显然，他们做到了，Unix的确成为了IT领域中的一块基石，被广泛地部署到了大学，政府和企业的服务
器和工作站上。并且，Unix的影响力开发迅速地传播开来，这恐怕超出了所有人的估计，正如ACM在
1983年给Thompson和Ritchie颁发最具价值的图灵奖（计算机领域的诺贝尔奖）所记录的那样–“Unix
系统的模式已经在以一种全新的编程思想领导着新一代的软件开发”。

###### Unix 早期

当然，Unix的成功不是一蹴而就的。在1971年，它首先被移植到了PDP-11微机（一个比PDP-7更强的微
机）。文本格式和文本编译程序在这时被加入进了Unix。并且，当时的实验室专利部门已经开始用这些
文本编译器，这也是Unix系统除开发团队之外的第一个用户。

在1972年，Ritchie引入了一个更高级的语言–C语言（基于Thompson的B语言），此后，Thompson用C
语言重写了Unix，这极大地增加了Unix的可移植跨平台性。然后，他们为这个操作系统命名
Unics(Uniplexed Information and Computing Service)，这是和Multics玩的一个文字游戏。
但最后，Unix成了最终的名字。[^2]

是时候向全世界宣布这个系统系统了。Ritchie和Thompson于1974年7月在_CACM_上发表了一篇论文–
“The UNIX Time-Sharing System”《Unix分时操作系统》，这篇论文就像一个风暴一样席卷了都
个IT界。直到有一天，Unix被限制在了只能由Bell实验室中的少数人使用。但是，因为有计算机协会
的支持，当时的Unix处于一个引爆点。

“_CACM_ 的那篇论文产生了一个戏剧化的影响”，IT历史学家Peter Salus在他的书
_The Daemon,the Gnu and the Penguin_ 中写到，“很快，Ken被铺天盖地的Unix的请求所淹没”。

###### 黑客的天堂

Thompson和Ritchie算得上是史上最名副其实的”黑客”，当时”黑客hacker”一词指的是那些把非
同寻常的创意组合起来，以一种超常智力，并以废寝忘食的态度解决了某个鲜为人知的软件问题的人。

Thompson和Ritchie他们的所使用的开发方法，他们所写下的代码，极大地吸引了大学里的程序员，并
在以后，这些大学中其中的一些程序员因为Unix开创了自己的公司，他们都是在Unix发展过程中的黑客，
就像，加利福尼亚州大学的Bill Joy，卡内基梅隆大学的Rick Rashid，以及Bell实验室David Korn。
当然，他们开创的这些公司都没有IBM，HP和Microsoft的资助。

“几乎从一开始，Unix就能够，也确实是开始了自我进化”，Thompson和Ritchie在*CACM*论文中说
到，“因为所有的源代码总可以容易被人在线地更改，所以，当有一个新的想法被发明，发现或是被建
议出来的时候，大家都非常自愿地修订或重写Unix系统和上面的软件”。

Korn，一个今天还在AT&T工作的员工，上世纪70年代曾是Bell实验室的一个程序员。“Unix的一个特点
是，一个小工具刚被完成，就被另一个更好的工具所代替”，他回忆起来说，“如果你觉得不好的话，
你完全可以开完一个更好的版本”。Korn当时为Unix开发了一个很具影响力的_Korn shell_，本质上
来说，当年的Unix就像今天的开源软件。

Salus，作为一个作家和技术历史家，回忆起，他上世纪70年代在多伦多大学时当教授时，在IBM
System/360大机上使用APL编程语言工作时的情景——那并不很好用，但是自从1978年圣诞节以后，一
个哥伦比亚大学的朋友给我演示了一下在微机上运行的Unix，“我说，‘我的上帝啊’，我彻底被你征
服了”。

他说，Unix最关键的优势是他有一个“管道”特性（1973年引入），这么我们可以把上一个程序的输出
轻松地传给下一个程序。“管道”的概念，由Bell实验室的McIlroy发明，随后“管道”这个东西被其
它几乎所有的操作系统复制，包括所有的Unix，Linux，DOS和Windows。

Unix还有一个不错的地方。“哇”，正如Salus所惊叹的，这个操作系统并不需要一个需要一百万美金
的大型机才能运行的操作系统。它在极其原始的小型的DEC PDP-7微机上开发出来，因为这是当是
Thompson和Ritchie可以找到用来写这个操作系统最好的机器。[^3]

很多很多的大学研究者们使用Unix就是因为这是一个简单和容易修改的操作系统，而且对硬件资源要求
的很少，代码也是开源和免费的。就像Sun Microsystems公司，或是一些用于特定的科学计算的主机
公司，例如Multiflow Computer，他们在选择Unix作为操作系统时都和那些大学研究者们有相同的原
因。

###### Unix 家谱

Unix成长为一个非私有的操作系统，是因为1956年的AT&T公司受命于联邦去经营电报电话服务。当然也
可以开发软件，甚至那个软件可以有”合理”收费的许可证，但是这个公司却被禁止从事任何和计算机
有并的商业活动。

Unix，在开发的过程中，没有任何的奖励制度和管理，从一开始在AT&T公司出现时，其是一种近似于好
奇或兴趣的东西。

然而，20世纪70年代，AT&T公司开始意到Unix所带来的商业价值。公司的律师开始寻找一些手段来保护
Unix，并让其成为一种商业机秘。从1979年Unix的版本V7开始，Unix的许可证开始禁止大学使用Unix的
源码，包括在授课中学习。

没问题！一个荷兰阿姆斯特朗自由大学（Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam）使用版本V6的计算机
科学系的教授Andrew Tanenbaum说。在1987年，他为教学目的克隆了一个Unix，创建一个叫Minix的
开源的操作系统，并可以在80286的Intel芯片上运行。

“Minix使用了所有和Unix一样的想法，并且这是一个非常灿烂的事物”，Salus说，”只有一个专门
是程序员的并且非常了解操作系统内部的人才成干出这件事来”。Minix从此变成了另一个起点——
Linus Torvalds在1991年使用Minix创造了Linux——这并不是一个简单的Unix克隆版本，只不过
它长得像Unix。

让我们再回到Linux出现的十年以前，Bill Joy，毕业于加利福尼亚州大学伯克利分校，当年，他在学
校的时候拷贝了Bell实验室的Unix版本，并且所到了这是一个很不错的可以使用Pascal编译器和文本
编译器的操作系统平台。

于是，他更改变扩展了Unix，形成了Unix的第二个最主要的分枝——BSD（Berkeley Software
Distribution）Unix。在1978年3月，Joy卖出了第一个BSD的拷贝：50美金。

到了1980年，有两个最主要的Unix的版本线，一个是Berkeley的BSD，另一个是AT&T的Unix，在这个时
候，很显然，竞争最终引发了Unix的战争。在这场战争中，好的是，软件开发人员还是能够得到Unix的
源码并对其按照自己的需要和兴致进行裁剪。而不好的是，Unix开始一发不可收拾地开发不停地出现各
种各样的变种。

1982年，Joy创建了Sun Microsystems公司并提供了工作站——Sun-1，运行在当一个BSD的版本，叫
SunOS（Solaris以之后的十年出现）。而AT&T则在随后的几年中发布了Unix System V的第一版，一
个具有强大影响力的操作系统，最终造就了IBM的AIX和HP的HP-UX。

###### Unix 战争

在上世纪80年代中期，大量的用户包括联邦政府，开始抱怨”Unix是一个理论上单一的可移植的操作系
统”，但事实上应该如此却并不是这样。Unix软件供应商们，一方面为这些抱怨而为其买单（“空头人
情”），而另一方面，他们却在没日没夜地给用户们定制Unix的各种功能和APIs，旨在为了留下用户。

而其它的Unix产商害怕At&T和Sun的联盟，所以，有各种各样的派别组织开始在”标准”上竞争，这些
组织大多在X或Open命名，开放软件基金会（Open Software Foundation），Unix开放系统国际和
公司（Unix International and Corporation for Open Systems）等等，在这些组织中形成的
各种各样的争论，辩论，抗辩和观点可以写一本厚厚的书，但他们无一例外地以肆意相互评击来主张一
个统一的Unix局面。

刚形成的开放软件基金会，其包括了IBM，HP，DEC和其它公司共同来反抗AT&T和Sun的联盟。在一个
1988年未出版的文件中，DAPRA（Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency）一个著名的小
型机先驱Gordon Bell说，“开放软件基金会OSF是一条’Unix穷人’进入正在发展的市场的一条路，
他们以此来供养那个的高利润代码博物馆”。

Unix战争在解决差异和设定一个操作系统标准中以失败告终。但在1993年，Unix社区听到了一个”警钟”
——Microsoft发布了Windows NT，一个企业级的，32位的，支持多处理的操作系统。而Windows NT
的所有者瞄准了Unix领域，并企图扩展Microsoft的桌面系统霸权到各种数据中心以及被Sun服务器所
占领的地方。

Microsoft的用户欢呼雀跃，Unix的产商开始惊慌。所有的主流的Unix竞争者们开始主动地联合起来
形成了一个通用开放式软件环境（Common Open Software Environment），并在随后的几年中放下
了他们的武器并开始着手把AT&T和Sun联盟为背景的”Unix International Group”并入开放软件基
金会OSF。这个合并在今天叫做——The Open Group，而证明Unix系统和所有者的是Single Unix
Specification，现在官方叫法是——“Unix”。

但在实践过程中，所有关于Unix的开发的确需要一个尽可能”标准化的”Unix，但是由于这些产商热衷
于竞争的习惯，在Unix下并没有做到，但这一”标准化”被随后如潮水一样涌来的一个叫Linux的操作
系统给完成了，这是一个开源的系统系统，则我们的Tanenbaum教授开发的Minix发展而来。

**什么是“Unix”?**

Unix，许多人会说，是一个几十年前在Bell实验室写的操作系统，Unix包括其所有的派生版本。今天，
最主要的Unix版本是从两个主干上分出来的：一个当然是从AT&T出来的，另一个则是通过加利福尼亚伯
克利分校产生的。今天，最顽强的分枝是IBM的AIX和HP的HP-UX以及Sun的Solaris。

然而，只有“The Open Group”拥有Unix的注册商标，定义一个Unix需要遵从Single Unix
Specification (SUS)。这包含了那些从来没有Unix思想的操作系统，比如Mac OS X Leopard（这
是从BSD和Mach那边发展来）以及IBM的z/OS（这是从大型机操作系统MVS发展来的），因为它们遵从了
SUS的API规范。基本上来说，只要那看起来像是一个Unix，那他就是一个Unix，而不管它是由什么代码
写的。

当然，一个比较宽松的Unix定包含了Unix-Like的操作系统，有些时候，也叫做Unix-Clones或
Look-Alikes，这些都是复制了Unix的东西但他们却并不直接使用Unix的代码。在这堆操作系统中，领
头羊是Linux。

最后，我们可以把Unix叫做一种”操作系统”因为这是已成了实际习惯。另外，对于一个操作系统的内
核，Unix实现了很多典型的工具比如命令行编辑器，应用程序接口，开发环境，开发库和文档
——Gary Anthes

###### Unix 的未来

由于这些长期竞争的各种版本的Unix缺乏可移值性，以及在价格方面没有优势，在x86芯片上占据主导地
位的Linux和Windows将会快速地让所有的IT机构把Unix替换掉。调查机构Gartner Group最近公布
了这项调查结果。

“在主机服务器方面，调查结果继续显示公众对Linux的热情，而Windows也有相应的增长，而Unix系
统还会长期存在，但是其逐渐地下滑”，这个调查报告由2009年2月发布。

“Unix还会像以前那样长期存在，但它已不如从前，而这种局面只会愈演愈烈”Gartner分析师
George Weiss说，”Linux将会是Unix的另一选择”，虽然Linux并没有像Unix那样经过了这么长的
开发、性能调整和压力测试的过程，但很明显他很快就要达到像Unix那样的性能，可靠和扩展性”。

但是，最近一个由Computerworld发起一个民意调查，暗示了所有一切把Unix踢开的举动不会很快地
发生。在一个由130个Unix用户和211个IT经理的问卷调查中显示，其90%的人说他们的公司”非常极端地
信任Unix”。不到半数的被访者说，”Unix是一个非常基本的平台，但我们并不确定其未来是否会被保
留”，而只有12%的受访者说，”我们期望在未来把Unix迁走”。节省成本，是诸多原因中最主要是一个
原因。

Weiss说，移值到x86处理器上会越来越快，因为这些硬件的价值实在是太便宜了。”水平扩展架构，集
群技术，云计算，虚拟化技术，你只需要把这些技术合并一下，通过这些技术应用的趋势，我们可以看
到操作系统的选择基本上就是Linux和Windows”，他说。

“例如”，Weiss说，”在最近Cisco宣布的Unified Computing架构，你可以拥有网络，存储，计
算，内存，光纤连接，但你不需要Unix。你可以安装Linux或Windows并使用x86平台。所以Intel赢得
了Linux取代Unix的那半壁江山”。

The Open Group，目前Single Unix Specification和Unix系统认证的所有者，开始有点退步并
有点承认Linux也是一个Unix系统的选择，因为Unix是”高端性能，可扩展性和性能可以用于很多相当
重要的应用”，而Linux则是一个更为小的，注重于并不太注重的应用。

AT&T的Korn是其中一个对Unix仍然看到的人。Korn说，Unix的长处是它的历史，自从1973年来引入”
管道”技术，它就可以被分成几个部分来部署。这会把Unix带向前方，他说，”这个哲学体系可以运用
在云计算中，在那里，你只需要创建一些小的可重用的碎片而不是一个巨大的应用”。

###### Unix 传奇

无论最后的Unix命运会怎么样，这个从Bell实验室出生的40岁的家伙，已经书写了一段传奇，而且这个
传奇可能还会继续几十年。它影响并产生了一个相当相当长的流行软件列表，包括给IBM，HP和Sun提供
的Unix，以及Apple的Mac OS X和Linux。它同样影响了Microsoft的Windows NT以及IBM和
Microsoft弄出来的DOS。

因为Unix，产生了许多公司，并走向了成功，因为当时Unix给了一个低成本的平台。在Internet上的
服务器，Unix是核心的建筑区，今天它也是所有通讯系统的心脏。由它孕育了许多架构上的创意，比如
管道，并且，Unix引出的Mach为科学作出了巨大的贡献，同时也为多处理器计算作出了贡献。

ACM在1983年因为Unix授予Thompson和Ritchie图灵奖时说过：“Unix系统最天才的部分是它的
framework，它激发了程序员们沿着这一方向工作”。

**译者陈皓注：**

[^1]: 在我们所认识的历史中，这两位程序员当时是在Multics下开发一个叫”太空旅行”的游戏，后来Multics项目解体了，这两位哥们觉得自己的游戏白弄了，所以就为了这个游戏开发了一个新的操作系统Unix，Unix的取名和Multics是相反的，Multics有”复杂的”的意思，而Unix则是”小巧的”意思。后来他们觉得这个操作系统非常不错，所以在后来发表了一篇论文向全世界宣布了这一操作系统，从此开启了计算机世界崭新的文化，详情可参看我的《Unix传奇》上篇，下篇。
[^2]: Unix下的经常出现缩写，如usr是user,ed是edit，gp是group，这也是Unix的文化。Unix的更名可能也是因为这个吧。
[^3]: 当时这个机器像垃圾一样被扔在实验室角落里。

<!-- tabs:end -->
