---
name: "C.R. Rao-《统计与真理》序言"
title: "STATISTICS AND TRUTH: Putting Chance to Work, Preface"
author: "C.R. Rao"
titles:
  zh: "《统计与真理》序言"
date: "1987"
created: ""
updated: ""
draft: false
read: "1"
sources: "STATISTICS AND TRUTH: Putting Chance to Work"
translates: "https://book.douban.com/subject/1238685/"
tags: ["文章/科技"]
---


# C.R. Rao

## STATISTICS AND TRUTH: Putting Chance to Work, Preface / 《统计与真理》序言

STATISTICS AND TRUTH: Putting Chance to Work

Preface

I consider it a great honour to be called upon to deliver the Ramanujan
Memorial Lectures under the auspices of the CSIR (Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research). I would like to thank Dr. A.P. Mitra, Director General
of the CSIR, for giving me this honour and opportunity to participate in the
Ramanujan centenary celebrations.

I gave three lectures, the first one in Delhi, the second in Calcutta and the
third in Madras as scheduled, which I have written up in four chapters for
publication. In the beginning of each lecture I have said a few words about
the life and work of Ramanujan, the rare mathematical genius who was a
legendary figure in my younger days. This is to draw the attention of the
younger generation to the achievements of Ramanujan, and to emphasize the need
to reform our educational system and reorganize our research institutes to
encourage creativity and original thinking among the students.

When I was a student, statistics was in its infancy and I have closely watched
its evolution over the last 50 years as an independent discipline of great
importance and a powerful tool in acquiring knowledge in any field of enquiry.
The reason for such phenomenal developments is not difficult to seek.

Statistics as a method of learning from experience and decision making under
uncertainty must have been practiced from the beginning of mankind. But the
inductive reasoning involved in these processes has never been codified due to
the uncertain nature of the conclusions drawn from given data or information.
The breakthrough occurred only in the beginning of the present century with
the realization that inductive reasoning can be made precise by specifying the
amount of uncertainty involved in the conclusions drawn. This paved the way
for working out an optimum course of action involving minimum risk, in any
given uncertain situation, by a purely deductive process. Once this mechanism
was made available, the flood gates opened and there was no end to the number
of applications impatiently awaiting methods which could really deliver the
goods.

From the time of Aristotle to the middle of the 19th century, chance was
considered by scientists as well as philosophers to be an indication of our
ignorance which makes prediction impossible. It is now recognized that chance
is inherent in all natural phenomena, and the only way of understanding nature
and making optimum predictions (with minimum loss)is to study the laws (or the
inner structure)of chance and formulate appropriate rules of action. Chance
may appear as an obstructor and an irritant in our daily life, but chance can
also help and create. We have now learnt to put chance to work for the benefit
of mankind.

I have chosen to speak on the foundations, modern developments and future of
statistics, because of my involvement with statistics over the last 45 years
as a teacher, research worker and consultant in statistics, and as an
administrator managing the academic affairs of a large organization devoted to
statistics. I grew up in a period of intensive developments in the history of
modern statistics.

As a student I specialized in mathematics - the logic of deducing consequences
from given premises. Later I studied statistics - a rational approach to
learning from experience and the logic of identifying the premises given the
consequences. I have come to realize the importance of both in all human
endeavours whether it is in the advancement of natural knowledge or in the
efficient management of our daily chores. I believe:

All knowledge is, in final analysis, history.
All sciences are, in the abstract, mathematics.
All judgements are, in their rationale, statistics.

The title of my Lectures, Statistics and Truth, and their general theme are
somewhat similar to those of Probability, Statistics and Truth, the collected
lectures of R. von Mises published several years ago. Since the latter book
appeared, there have been new developments in our thinking and attitude
towards chance. We have reconciled with the "Dice-Playing God"and learnt to
plan our lives to keep in resonance with uncertainties around us. We have
begun to understand and accept the beneficial role of chance in situations
beyond our control or extremely complex to deal with. To emphasize this I have
chosen the subtitle, Putting Chance to Work.

Dr. Joshi, the Director of the National Physical Laboratory, reminded me what
Thomas Huxley is reported to have said, that a man of science past sixty does
more harm than good. Statistically it may be so. As we grow old we tend to
stick to our past ideas and try to propagate them. This may not be good for
science. Science advances by change, by the introduction of new ideas. These
can arise only from uninhibited young minds capable of conceiving what may
appear to be impossible but which may contain a nucleus for revolutionary
change. But I am trying to follow Lord Rayleigh who was an active scientist
throughout his long life. At the age of sixty-seven (which is exactly my
present age), when asked by his son, who is also a famous physicist, to
comment on Huxley's remark, Rayleigh responded:

That may be if he undertakes to criticize the work of younger men, but I do
not see why it need be so if he sticks to things he is conversant with.

However J.B.S. Haldane used to say that Indian scientists are polite and they
do not criticize the work of each other, which is not good for the progress of
science.

It gives me great pleasure to thank Dr. Y.R.K. Sarma of the Indian Statistical
Institute for the generous help he has given in editing the Ramanujan Memorial
Lectures I gave at various places in the form of a book and looking after its
publication.

Calcutta  
December 12, 1987  
C.R. Rao  
